Today's episode is going to be on
exercise selection and exercise order.
They kind of go hand in hand. And in
this discussion, I'm going to be talking
about a concept called exercise
redundancy where we consider that we
don't just design a program based on our
favorite exercises. What we need to
consider is if you get our favorite
exercises, we start with whatever it is
the highest priority and then it's not
just the second favorite exercise. It's
like, well, this exercise may have
covered off some of the things that the
second exercise that you your second
favorite exercise already does, so
there's no need for this second exercise
anymore. We need to consider something
that we haven't achieved when we do this
first exercise. So, those are the
concepts that I'm going to be teaching
as well as the exceptions to that rule.
So, stay tuned. I'm going to polish this
up. These are one-hour presentations and
I'm going to cut out all of the
introductions where I say hello to my
people so it's as quick and concise as
possible. I hope you guys enjoy it. This
is kind of geared around anyone who's an
industry professional for sure, but if
you write programs for yourself, this is
information that I would say majority of
people just don't know. And I've been in
this industry for over 20 years. And not
just like in the industry, I've worked
really really hard in this industry to
be actually good. and the programs that
I've created have developed some of the
strongest athletes on the planet and I'm
giving you this for free. So, hope you
enjoy. Let's do it. My favorite topic to
discuss and that is anything to do with
program design and it's a small
component of program design and arguably
one of the most important and that is
exercise selection and exercise order.
So this is going to be teaching you and
helping you create programs that make
sense. Okay. Exercise selection and
exercise order cannot be separated. Once
the exercise is chosen, it influences
every exercise that follows. Designing
an effective session is not about
picking the best exercises for a muscle
group or selecting your favorite lifts
for each body part. It's about selecting
movements that serve the individual's
primary goal and sequencing the
exercises logically. So what does this
mean? So, we've got, you know, leg day,
chest day, whatever our bros split is.
And think about your favorite muscle
group. And you think, what's my favorite
exercise? That's what we're going to do.
What's my second favorite exercise?
That's what I'm going to do second.
What's my third favorite exercise?
That's what I'm going to do third. And
so on. And just pick the best exercises
for that muscle group and just do them
all. Because why would I want to do bad
exercises? The fact is once we've chosen
our favorite exercise or the the most
important exercise that we're going to
be doing first, it changes what that
second exercise is going to be. So, we
don't just choose the second favorite or
the second best exercise for that muscle
group. You think about an exercise that
hits areas that you've neglected in the
main movement, which will probably be
very different to your second favorite
exercise for that muscle group. So, this
is the key considerations for program
structure. And this is another topic.
You know, when I speak to you guys, it's
like I teach you these concepts. Don't
just sit there and go, "Great concept.
Let's just move on and do what we were
already doing. Please use this." Okay?
Copy me. All right? You have my
permission. All of these concepts are
yours. I want to see you program with an
understanding of this. Okay? So, the
first exercise of the day is the highest
relevance to achieving the trainees
goal. Okay? So, what does the trainee
mean? Like, if I'm the trainer and I'm
coaching you, you're not trying to
fulfill my goal. you're trying to
fulfill or I'm trying to fulfill your
goal. The person who's following the
program, it needs to be what is the most
important to that individual. Now, this
is usually the most specific, most
complex, and most stimulating, and also
the most fatiguing exercise of the day
is what needs to be done first. So, a
little analogy that I often use when
we're considering exercise order is if
we had two groups of athletes, both of
them were performing exercises A, B, C,
and D. And one group performed those
exercises in that order, A, B, C, D, and
the second group did it in reverse
order, D, C, BA. The first group would
be the best at exercise A, second best
at B, third best at C, and so on. The
second group would be the best at
exercise D, second best at exercise C,
and so on. Moral of the story, okay,
place first, your highest priority.
That's what you're going to get the best
at, which makes a lot of sense because
that's when we have the most amount of
energy and therefore we're going to
apply the most effort and therefore
we're going to get the best results.
Okay, there's a lot of research on uh
things that talk about not in the same
words, but the law of diminishing
returns. So the first things that we do
in the day gets the most stimulus and
even like the very first set of the day
gets the most stimulus. The second set
doesn't provide as much return on
investment as the first set and the
third set even less and fourth set even
less. Which is where team low volume
team now talking about the need for
reducing volume and the need for
reducing the amount of sets that you do
on every single exercise. So, a lot of
people are now saying things like you
don't really need to do more than two
sets of any given exercise. Why? This is
due to the law of diminishing returns.
The first set provides the highest
stimulus. The second set significantly
less return on investment than the
first. And the third set of the day is
even worse. So therefore, why bother
doing it? Now, I believe it's not that
simple. Okay? It's overly simplified.
Yes, the law of diminishing returns does
apply. Quoting Alex Horoszi, the law of
diminishing returns are still returns,
right? So although they may be less, we
are still benefiting from it. But either
way, we need to take this into
consideration when we're considering our
secondary exercise in our, you know, by
the time we've finished our first sets,
our first exercise of the day, we are
absolutely going to have accumulated
some fatigue. And what we want to do,
and this is what I'm going to define
next, is avoid a concept called exercise
redundancy. Okay? So instead of choosing
the second best exercise for that muscle
group or your second favorite exercise
for that muscle group, what we need to
consider is the areas that we've
neglected in the main movement. So what
could we have neglected? So I've defined
it here as the joint angles, ranges of
motion or muscles neglected in the main
movement. The choice of exercise here
must be less fatiguing than the first
exercise, but still addresses ranges or
demands not fully covered in the first
exercise. Now, a lot of the times, and
this is what we are going to be going
into, I'm going to give you guys
examples of my eight category model for
exercise selection, achieving structural
balance. So, whenever I'm writing a
program, typically I've got this eight
category model in front of me. Well, I
don't physically have it, but I I know
it very well. It may help you guys to
have it plastered up in front of you.
And it's very easy to just kind of
choose an equal amount of effort and
volume from each of these eight
categories rather than piling up a ton
of volume in any single category. And
I'm going to be elaborating on that in a
moment. Now, here's the next thing.
There can be more than one secondary
exercise. So, just because secondary
means number two, um there are instances
where we still have neglected. So after
we've done our main exercise and our
secondary exercise, there could be some
areas of that single muscle group that
we've neglected, which I'll explain in a
moment. After this point, so what we
need to consider is the degree of
difficulty must decrease as we progress
through the session. The first exercise
of the day is going to accumulate the
most fatigue. The second exercise of the
day, we don't have as much energy. So
therefore, don't do a really, really
hard exercise. And then the third
exercise of the day, consider the same
thing. it needs to be slightly less
complex. Then we get to the next
category, the last category, which I've
just titled ancillary exercises. Now,
none of these titles are official. It's
just the way that I like to categorize
these. Okay, so the ancillary exercises,
what I use here is a lowcost exercise.
So, it's low cost of fatigue. And things
that we can consider is firstly, what I
usually consider is prioritizing joint
health. So if you ever write a program
and you think of you know what are your
favorite rotator cuff exercises or core
work or small muscle groups like that
this is the time at the end of the
session. So one category is joint health
exercise. The next category is lowcost
feelood exercises Brett Contras. So he
talks about his experience with coaching
females. So if you don't know who he is
he specializes in training glutes and it
just so happens that it's a much more
popular muscle group amongst the
females. So majority of his audience are
females and he trains a lot of fitness
models and stage models that have very
well-developed glutes. And he talks
about the art of coaching as well as the
science. So from a science standpoint,
he has a PhD. That's the highest
accolade you can achieve in the world of
academia. So science, he understands it.
Yet he talks a lot about the art of
coaching coming from real world
experience. He still works with he owns
a gym and he coaches women every day.
That's what he does. And he talks a lot
about something that I absolutely agree
with the need for factoring in training
morale and having the people that you're
working with enjoy the work that they
are doing. And same with yourself. If
you're following a program, you know,
enjoying the work that you do is going
to allow you to apply more effort and
therefore achieve a superior outcome
than if you come into the session hate
the exercise, give it a halfass effort
and therefore get a lesser return on
investment. Okay? So enjoying what you
do. Now he talks about strategies such
as performing a lowcost feelood exercise
for the glutes like giving them like a
frog pump at the end of the day. high
rep, low load frog pump or that's just
one example of exercises. Uh there's
other exercises, the Hello Boys, I don't
know what you call them. Good girl, bad
girl, I don't know what you call them.
The adductor abductor machine. Um you
know, low cost of fatigue, but you do a
high rep set and you're going to have um
a lot of pump in the muscle. You're
going to feel great about yourself
walking out of the session with a big
juicy butt pump. That doesn't sound
right, but anyway, you know what I'm
saying. Same applies for if you want to
achieve the same goal with a big juicy
bicep pump or a big juicy calf pump.
These are lowcost feelood exercises if
that's your goal. So bicep curls, calf
raises, if I do a ton of those at the
end of the session, what I need to
consider is is that going to interfere
with my energy levels for tomorrow's
session? And if it's a an exercise
that's usually like an isolation
exercise, the answer is typically no.
So, it needs to be a lowcost feelood
exercise rather than, let's just say you
say, "My favorite exercise of the day is
a deadlift." I'm going to recommend you
don't use that at the end of the session
just because you feel good. It's not a
lowcost feelood exercise. Winston, you
warm up hamstrings before the squat. Is
this considered a warmup or an ancillary
exercise? I don't always warm up the
hamstrings before a squat. Sometimes I
do. Um, and I wouldn't consider it an
ancillary exercise. And in fact, talking
about any warm-up exercise, I don't
count that with total training volume
because as a warm-up, I typically don't
perform it at a close enough proximity
to fail to deem it effective. I
certainly don't apply the principle of
progressive overload to my warm-up
exercise. So, what I mean by that, and
this is a mistake that a lot of people
make. If I say things like, "Do you
train calves? Do you train abs? Do you
train, you know, shoulder health muscles
like rotator cuff, the external rotators
of your shoulder? And the common answer
is, yeah, you know, I'll do the big
three, the McGill big three for my core.
So, I do that as a warm-up. So,
therefore, yes, I do train core. Uh,
wrong answer. You warm up your core, but
that's not enough stimulus to achieve a
positive outcome to achieve meaningful
gains. Right? Same with the people who
do these external rotation exercises on
a band to warm up their shoulders. If I
say to them, do you strengthen your
external rotators? And they say, yes, I
do. I do this as warm-up. Then the
answer is no. You don't train them
because you're not applying the
principle of progressive overload. It's
not counted to the volume that I'm
actually counting that will contribute
to you achieving meaningful gains. Okay.
So, uh let's read this out. So, low cost
of fatigue. I prioritize joint health.
So, in my session, I typically don't
just accumulate extra volume because I
need to feel good about a juicy glute
pump or whatever it is. I walk out of
the session feeling like, okay, good.
I've done my prehab stuff, my ancillary
joint health work. I know that that's
going to contribute to my strength game,
but that's just the way that I feel.
Now, here's I'm going to play devil's
advocate on myself. Who's to say that
the primary work isn't good joint health
exercise. All right? So, building big
pecs, building big lats, building I
shouldn't just say big, strong pecs,
strong lats, strong romboids, strong
delts. Who's to say that's not a
effective joint health exercise? Because
actually it is. They are important. so
strong. Every muscle has a carryover
effect to good joint health. Which is
where you can say your lowcost feel-good
exercises, your party pump for your
glutes, your calves, your biceps, your
triceps, or whatever it may be, a
dumbbell lateral raise finisher for the
day to walk out of the session with
massive juicy delts. That's a joint
health exercise arguably, but it must be
low cost. So therefore, if in doubt, if
you don't understand what's low cost and
high cost, isolation exercises is a
pretty good start. Okay, compound, which
means multiple joints. So, accumulating
more volume on compound exercises will
most likely contribute to more fatigue
that may interfere with the next day
session. Now, let's talk a little bit
about exercise redundancy. Okay, so
these here's a definition that you guys
can keep. Two exercises can both be
effective in isolation but unnecessary
together. For example, performing a flat
dumbbell press and a flat barbell press
within the same session. is loading the
same structures in practically the same
way. Both are great exercises, but
performing them together is an example
of exercise redundancy. Exercise
redundancy is where you include multiple
exercises in a program that train the
same muscle in the same way through the
same joint actions with the same
resistance profile without adding any
meaningful new stimulus. Good program
isn't about cramming more exercises in.
It's about choosing exercises that
complement each other rather than
overlap. I'm going to give you a ton of
examples so you can have a better
illustration of this. I'm also going to
give you exceptions to this rule because
sometimes I don't avoid exercise
redundancy and I will choose exercises
that are typically considered redundant
with intention. Exceptions to the rule
is fatigue management usually with
advanced lifters. What do I mean by
this? In this context, specificity
becomes the priority. So, this is
usually as an advanced lifter approaches
competition. So, not all year round.
Whenever I say advanced lifters,
typically I'm talking about high
absolute strength athletes. Okay? So,
you've got elite athletes that are have
a high relative strength. So, usually a
lot of the 50 kg weight classes and
below, usually females. This isn't a
huge concern because they may have a
high relative strength, which means they
may be able to deadlift triple body
weight as a 50 kg lifter. That's
outstanding. I work with some elite
lifters that do that 150 kg deadlift for
a 50 kg girl, woman, whatever. Get
offended if you like. However, they
usually are able to do heavy deadlifts
within the same week. Whereas you get a
male that's 100 kilograms doing triple
body weightight deadlift would not be
able to repeat that effort with the same
degree of energy multiple times per week
and in many instances need to spread
that out over the fortnight. So my
highest level deadlifters will only
deadlift heavy every fortnight. They
deadlift every week but it goes heavy
session, light session, heavy session,
light session. The idea of the light
session is to maintain the skill. So
maintain practice of that movement. So
instead of just saying why don't we just
do it every fortnite well because you
know frequency of a minimum of weekly
for any of these exercises allows us to
maintain the skill of the movement which
is also important. So back to this
talking about the exception to the rule
is typically discussing advanced high
absolute strength athletes especially
approaching competition peak time. So
the competition movement must be trained
heavy to maintain technical precision
and performance readiness. These lifts
are highly loadable and therefore highly
fatiguing. So talk about a powerlifter
as an example performing an exercise
like a low bar squat working up to one
rep max. Same with a heavy arch bench
press especially with the stronger
athletes and most specifically the
conventional deadlift. These are the
most fatiguing exercises that we have.
So with my highle lifters, they need to
be exposing themselves to a weekly
frequency of these movements to maintain
the skill. However, if they are
performing enough volume of those
movements to build or even at the very
least maintain muscle mass and strength,
they may be accumulating a little bit
too much fatigue, which is where I will
have separate strategies such as a top
set back down set method where we're
only doing, you know, a low exposure,
one to two top sets of that specific
movement under heavy loads. And then the
secondary exercise I will choose a
variation that's not as loadable and
therefore not as fatiguing but can be
considered redundant because it targets
that muscle group and joint action in
the exact same way. However, the reason
why it's not redundant is because we
haven't performed as much volume as
necessary to progress on that exercise.
Okay, I'm going to elaborate on this as
we go. Hope you're understanding. Okay,
so back to the definition as written on
the slide. Performing enough total
volume of the exact competition lifts to
build or even maintain muscle would
exceed the lifter's recovery capacity.
The solution is to limit the lifter's
exposure to the primary lift while
accumulating additional volume through
closely related variations. Although
these variations may appear redundant,
they allow continued stimulus to the
same movement pattern with a lower
fatigue cost. So this is where we enter
the top set plus variation model. So you
may have heard me talk about the top set
back down set method which is another
strategy. I'm just giving you guys the
example of where I avoid the rule of
avoiding exercise redundancy. Okay. So
this is not exercise redundancy because
it's the same exercise. So that's top
set back down set. But a lot of the
times when I do a top set back down set
method, I perform the top set and the
back down set method I accumulate more
volume of the movement but I
intentionally reduce the effort so that
it's not fatiguing. When I do a top set
and variation model, I don't have to
reduce the effort. By default, it's a
harder exercise to load. So, I can still
train it at a high effort, but because
it's hard to load, it's not that heavy,
it's also not fatiguing. Slightly
different strategy. If I'm confusing
anyone, please let me know. Examples.
Okay. Okay. And the first example that
comes to my mind is one that I'm using
currently on Halfthor Bjönson who I'm
coaching to deadlift 515 kg at the
enhanced games on May 24. So he's
currently about I believe it's 14 weeks
out. And right now he only gets because
he's so damn strong from now he's like
our strategy is to not deadlift heavy
more than once a fortnite. is not script
deficit deadlift and this has been
in my programs since I started working
with Sebastian you know
>> so therefore 14 weeks and even back when
it was 16 weeks so this is when this
specific program started 16 weeks out
only gives him eight total exposures to
a heavy deadlift because if we so that
means fortnightly heavy deadlifts which
means if we deadlifted heavy every week
he's so damn strong that it's so heavy
therefore so fatiguing he won't be able
to recover from it. So it sounds like
eight 16 weeks or 14 weeks is a long
time but have that that's the amount of
exposures we get to that heavy lift and
right now the strategy is heavy single
so one set of one and then two sets of
five of a snatch grip deadlift from a
deficit. Now to add context to this, his
next heavy deadlift session is 410 kg
and the weights that he's doing snatch
grip deadlifts on is, you know, between
230 to 260 kg. So it's significantly
less. It's about 60%. However, I will
tell you now, even the world's strongest
deadlifter finds those weights on the
snap trip deadlift from a deficit
challenging. They're hard to do. But
because the absolute load is quite low,
they produce less systemic fatigue.
You're working as hard but it's a
lighter weight, so it's not as fatiguing
on the body and it's the body is able to
recover from this stimulus a lot quicker
than the more loadable option, which is
the straight up conventional deadlift.
Other examples with other lifts, the low
bar squat using a back down of a paused
or a one and a quarter squat. So these
are exercises that target the movement.
It's the same movement, but we've slowed
it down. We've added a pause. we've
added a one and a quarter and therefore
decreased the loadability of the
movement. So therefore due to the
decreased load it has decreased the
fatigue competition bench press
especially with the super strong bench
presses. So this is where you know your
5x5s it sounds like a nice idea however
that can be too much load too much
volume for the strong lifter to be able
to recover from. Sounds like a strength
stimulus, but this is a high volume
phase for an elite bench presser. So
therefore, I would do a top set of a
bench press, whatever the rep range,
it's usually kind of strength rep
ranges. So that means less than five or
less than six, 80% plus of your 1 RM.
I'd do one set, maybe two, probably
still one. And then I'll do back down
work on exercises like a pause spotto
bench press or even flat dumbbell press.
So, it's training the movement the exact
same way. Seemingly redundant exercise,
but because we didn't accumulate enough
volume on the top sets, it's not enough
work to progress in strength or even at
the very least maintain strength or
muscle mass. Okay? So, the strategy here
is to maintain specificity, accumulate
volume, and manage fatigue. Now, let's
have a look at the eight category model
for structural balance. Now, if you guys
know me for long enough, you you'll have
seen this a lot, and I don't care. I'm
going to show it to you again. These
eight categories are not perfect. There
are muscle groups that are excluded in
this that we can and should add on such
as your joint health exercises, arms,
neck, calves. There are movements that
aren't added to this. And a lot of
people might look at the lower body
patterns. So the squat knee dominant and
squat hip dominant. And a lot of people
look at it and say, "What about the
lunges?" Well, actually, I categorize
any of the lunge or unilateral lower
body split squat lunge variations within
that squat category. So, it's just a
onelegged squat. Okay, so lunges do fit
in these categories. And we do have a
knee dominant lunge and we do have a hip
dominant lunge. How do we determine the
difference between the two? A knee
dominant lunge or squat has more knee
bend. How much knee bend? As much as
possible. How much is that? where the
hamstrings squash against the calves in
the bottom position. And usually this
will be paired with a vertical torso
angle. Okay? So the knees come forward,
the torso is vertical, the hamstrings
pressed against the calf versus a hip
dominant squat or lunge pattern, which
is where there is typically a lot more
forward torso lean and therefore a more
acute angle at hip joint flexion and
therefore less knee bend. Okay, so this
is where it starts to make sense. If I
do a squat session and my first exercise
of the day is choose your favorite squat
pattern, whether it's a high bar or low
bar, think about it as what category
does that come under. So usually, let's
just say a powerlifter doing a low bar
squat, which is typically where our
powerlifter squat, that is a hip
dominant pattern. So what's a secondary
exercise that would not be redundant?
Okay, not necessarily a leg press, not
necessarily a Bulgarian split squat.
Why? Because they're both hip dominant.
They are redundant exercises. They
target the same muscle and the same
joint action in the same way with a
different machine. Okay? Or a bar from a
barbell to a machine, whatever it is. So
instead, you'd be better off choosing
one exercise from the hip dominant squat
category and then if in doubt, secondary
exercise from the other category
available. And all of the other
categories have the same examples which
we are going to get into. So let's have
a look at these categories. These are
tools and templates for you to own.
Okay? So if in doubt, and this is what
I'll often teach people, I mean I don't
have this in front of me when I design
programs, but I just know it very well.
Have a look at the exercises that fit
within these categories. Okay? So in a
press session, you can consider first
exercise of the day, choose one from
horizontal push. Second exercise, choose
one from the vertical push. Like that's
a pretty easy way of avoiding exercise
redundancy, strengthening the push
pattern in a slightly different way.
Stiletto squats, hack squats, squat
patterns that were knee dominant. in
this knee dominant squat pattern. High
bar squat, I should say with elevated
heels. Front squat with elevated heels,
split squat, where the knee progresses
over the toe and the hamstrings press
against the calf and the torso remains
upright. That's knee dominant CC squat.
Now, here's the next piece of context
that we need to add to this. Uh, you
know, and this is kind of going on the,
you know, the topic of when people say,
you know, things are bad, this exercise
is bad. A lot of the times we have to
understand context when we're
considering if an exercise is bad or
not. So people saying things like, you
know, knee over toes is bad, a
squat is bad because I saw Xlifter, you
know, completely rupture their ligaments
in a squat. It's like, okay, let's
add some context to this. The context is
that individual's probably trying to max
out on that exercise. Now, here's a
rule. Here's a general rule. Every
exercise comes with a different profile.
Some exercises suit very very heavy
weight and low reps. Some do not. Now,
which ones do and do not? To keep it
simple, compound exercises, which allow
you to spread the load over multiple
joints and multiple muscle groups, are
typically quite complex and are more
suitable for low rep sets and heavy
loads because you are able to spread
those loads over multiple joints and
multiple muscle groups. For example,
conventional deadlift, low bar back
squat, powerlifting style bench press,
which are also exercises that are
typically deemed not suitable for muscle
hypertrophy. Why are they not suitable
for muscle hypertrophy? What are the
rules of muscle hypertrophy when we're
selecting what's an appropriate exercise
for a bodybuilder? Bodybuilders are very
specific when they perform an exercise
with which muscle they are specifically
targeting. When you do a deadlift, what
muscle are you targeting? Well, all of
them kind of thing. I want as many
muscles to contract as possible so I can
shift this heavy load. Same with a low
bar squat. Same with an archback bench
press with a wide grip powerlifting
style. It's not just pecs. I'll tell you
right now, if I take a movement like a
powerlifting bench press to absolute
fail. Um, I can't tell you which muscles
failed first. It's a combination of kind
of everything. It's not necessarily
pecs. It could be pecs a little bit and
the deltoids are going to contribute and
same with the triceps, right? Context
matters. You know, I'm not telling you
to go and do a knee dominant squat to a
1RM. Think about the movement profile
and think about the load ability of that
specific exercise. Okay. Another
example, people say things like, don't
flare the elbows in a bench press. Now,
I have worked with highlevel
bodybuilders that specifically flare
their elbows in a bench press in order
to target the pec muscle, the pec major
in the fully lengthened position. Now,
let's add a little bit of context to
this. Who's been told not to flare their
elbows in a bench press? Usually
powerlifters who perform heavy one rep
maxes. Do bodybuilders perform heavy one
rep maxes? The answer is for fun they
may, but typically when they want to be
working towards their goals of building
the maximizing muscle growth, typically
they're using a higher rep range with
lighter loads. And when they perform
those exercises such as a flared elbow
bench press or another word for that is
a guillotine press. I'm pronouncing that
incorrectly. I don't speak French.
Guillotine, whatever. Excuse me. Now,
that exercise is seen, you know, that's
it that goes against the exact cue. Tuck
the elbows in a bench press. But it is
the exact technique that a bodybuilder
may use to target a specific muscle in a
specific way. What's what's more context
to the way that it's targeted? it is
loaded with lighter loads and higher
reps because that's what suits that
exercise. Okay, now let's dive deeper
into this. Why does that not suit? So
what's the benefits of that exercise? It
places the muscle at the greatest
stretch. Okay, so the more you flare the
elbow, the more we're stretching the
pecs. The more we tuck the elbow, the
more we're placing the pecs in a shorter
position. Midtuck, mid-range pec
contraction. Close tuck is the shortest
position, which is kind of like not a
very good way to load the movement. So,
let's add to this. What's the strongest
contractile length of a muscle? We have
fully stretched, mid-range, and fully
shortened. The strongest is mid-range.
So, a powerlifter wants to place the pec
in its mid-range by tucking the elbows
because that's the strongest contractile
length of the muscle. A powerlifter will
also want to avoid placing the pec in
the fully lengthened position because
that is the weakest. What do we know
about weak things? Weak things break.
Let's have a look at pec tears. Not sure
if you want to. It's a little bit
gruesome. But if you Google pec tear on
YouTube, you are going to see a few
common things. Firstly, the pecs
typically tear when the barbell is on
the chest. Why? Because that's where the
pec is at its greatest stretch and
therefore it's weakest contractile
length. Something else that you'll also
see is typically the elbows flare as
it's happening. What happens with elbow
flare? It increases the tension on the
pec major. So this is why we are
teaching tuck the elbows and even pick
the chest up. So arch the upper back so
it doesn't go to that full range where
it takes the pec major to the fully
stretched position. Another example is a
stiletto squat or a squat with a 1
RM load. Don't do those exercises. Don't
do knees over toes with 1 RMS. Choose
the appropriate rep ranges. So, if you
want to have a look at um squats
performed correctly, you'll probably be
looking up people like Tom Plattz, very
famous for the best quadriceps in
bodybuilding. And he loved exercises
like that. And he is a huge advocate for
high volume. And he actually is on
record talking about low reps, heavy
loads doesn't build quads, which I
disagree with. It can for certain
individuals. and he talks about how he
used to squat up against people like one
fellow by the name of Fred Hatfield
who's also named Dr. Squats. He was able
to squat over 1,000 lbs which is 453
something kg is 1,000 lb. Tom Plattz
can't do that. But Tom Plattz's quads
were way bigger than Fred Hatfield.
Context matters and there are exceptions
to every rule and everybody is
different, individual differences, etc.
Okay, hope this is all making sense to
you guys. So, I've given you guys the
exercise categories so you can better
understand like if you're choosing on
your push day, one from a horizontal
push, your secondary exercise, choose it
from the different push category. Let's
put this into practice. So, I've got two
programs for you. Very good. Copy,
paste, put your logo on it, sell for a
lot of dollars, make money, thank me
later. Now, I'm giving you an example
first of a program. So, this isn't a
periodized plan. So for those who
understand or don't, periodized plans
don't tell you the reps and sets and the
exercise that we do on Monday. The
periodized plan tells us the training
stimulus for that various phase. Okay?
So a periodized plan is the long-term
plan which sorts out the different
training modalities such as you know
starting with higher volume to achieve
work capacity. Then we move to reducing
the volume to achieve strength. Reduce
the reps so we can increase the loads.
And then we move to a peaking phase. Not
once have I mentioned how many reps, how
many sets, and what exercise we're
doing. But that is what a periodized
plan looks like. This here is a
messocycle. The messocycle. Also, you
can consider this the program. So if
you're familiar, this is the kind of
thing that I give you guys every four
weeks. So I like four weekly messy
cycles. doesn't mean 6 weeks is wrong or
5 weeks or 13 weeks. Winston psychopath.
Okay. As long as you're able to justify
the messocycle duration. Sorry, that's a
personal joke. Winston Lamb, I'm going
to expose him. He does 13we meocycles.
Um, just so be careful of him. Anyhow, I
like four weeks. Um, but sometimes I
write 8week programs as well. 52 weeks.
Fair enough. That's starting to make
more sense. That's starting to You know
what I do? 3x6 macro cycles which is uh
four-week blocks four times four week
blocks within the macro cycle takes us
to 48 weeks which is three cycles per
year with a 4-week fun phase during
Christmas now you know so have a look
here so this is a typical program where
we're following the rules of avoiding
exercise redundancy okay so let's have a
look at day one squat in no particular
order so I go lower upper lower upper
you can start with bench day whatever it
may be It doesn't really matter. When
people ask me these questions, when I
give them a program like this and they
say, "Do you mind if I start with an
upper body? Is it going to change the
program?" No, it doesn't. I don't think
of the calendar week, right? So, Monday
to Sunday. I just think of, you know,
start with upper body. So, we start on
day two. So, that's bench, then day
three, and then day four, then day one.
Like, whatever order you have it, as
long as it's upper, lower, upper, lower,
and not lower, lower, upper, upper, that
doesn't make sense. Okay. So, let's have
a look at the squat day. So, stiletto
squat 3x8. So, by the looks of this
program, I mean, of course, I created
it, so I know exactly what it is, but
let's just say I didn't. I'd look at
that and go 3x8, that means I can't load
it real real heavy. So, to to add
context to that, um 80% is kind of like
80% and plus is our strength phase. And
how many reps can you do of 80% and
plus? Like six reps and lower, right?
So, this is automatically eight reps.
And therefore, I know it's a lot lighter
than 80% of your max, right? And then we
choose an exercise. So that means it's
not on the strength phase. So if it's
higher volume than the strength phase,
typically what are we working towards?
Hypertrophy. You guessed it, right? So
I'd look at this and say this is a
lovely choice of exercises for a
hypertrophy stimulus. First exercise of
the day on squat day, knee dominant
squat pattern. That's a stiletto squat.
Uh you look, I've written stiletto
squat. Now I'm expecting you and I
should write this and I typically do
with a high bar position. So stiletto
squat with a low bar kind of like kind
of defeats the purpose. There's
exceptions to every rule, but we're
assuming a tide bar here. So, that is a
purely, you know, knee bend, minimal hip
bend, vertical torso, maximal knee bend,
hamstrings press against the calf. We
are focusing on quads. That's a knee
dominant squat pattern. So, therefore,
what's a secondary exercise? What's
something that we can do that targets a
joint angle or a range of motion or a
muscle that we neglected in the main
movement? Well, very simply, that's from
the quad dominant pattern or the knee
dominant pattern. Let's choose something
from the hip dominant pattern. What have
we got here? As I said, lunges go within
these categories. And I'm choosing a
Bulgarian split squat. Typically,
Bulgarian split squat, forward torso,
lean, knee stacked over ankle mish t
vertical tibia. Okay. Now, one of the
rules here with exercise order is there
can be more than two secondary
exercises. What is an example of this?
Well, let's have a look. Did we neglect
any muscles? So, what are the muscle
groups we're working towards? This is
lower body squat pattern. It's kind of
like quad day, right? Did we neglect
anything here with our quad dominant
squat pattern? So, vertical tibia knee
forward progression over the toe and
maximal knee bend. Secondary exercise,
forward torso lean with our Bulgarian
split squat, minimal knee bend. Did we
neglect anything? Of course we did. I
know you're thinking it. Rectus for. So
this is a muscle that's undertrained
during squat patterns or I should say
during compound lower body squat
patterns. Okay. So the rectus forous is
a barticular muscle compared to that's
one of the four quadricep muscles. The
other three starts with the word vasis.
Vasis mediialis lateralis and
intermediates. They all have one thing
in common which is they only cross the
knee joint. Therefore they are only
responsible for knee joint extension.
The fourth quadricep muscle is the
rectus forous which is a barticular
muscle. It crosses the knee joint and
the hip joint. And when we move both of
those joints at the same time such as a
compound movement like a squat or a
lunge, it usually moves them in a
conflicting pattern. So the rectus
forous flexes the hip and extends the
knee. When we're squatting, we are
flexing the hip and flexing the knee or
extending the hip and extending the knee
at the same time. So they are
conflicting actions and therefore thank
you Mish and therefore is underdeveloped
during a squat pattern. So therefore the
rectus forous is neglected. How do we
target a biotic muscle? Isolating it.
What's a good isolation exercise? Have a
look at C leg extension. Okay. So this
is a complete session for the quadriceps
completely avoiding exercise redundancy.
Fourth exercise of the day lowcost
feelgood exercise. I've or joint health
exercise. Now I consider what are the
main joints that we're loading during
these exercises for my lower body day.
This is usually my opportunity to add in
core work. So I've added in Copenhagen
plank. It's not better or worse than ab
wheel rollouts or crunches or planks or
whatever it is. Okay. As long as you can
justify why. Great. There's day one
avoiding exercise redundancy. Day two
bench press. Let's just do the A's. So
A1 is push. B1 is push. Okay. So that's
all the pushing muscles. The ones are
the pushing muscles and then the two is
the pulling muscles. So starting with A1
close grip bench press, B1 is high incin
dumbbell press. C1 is dumbbell lateral
raise. Okay. So if you understand how
we're doing this, so one is in the
horizontal push plane. If you
understand, I've put the high incline
dumbbell press in the vertical plane.
And then a muscle that we've neglected
is the lateral deltoids, which we can
target with a lowcost feel-good exercise
such as lateral raise. Secondary
movements. Let's go to the pull pattern.
So barbell bent over row. That's a
horizontal pull pattern. Okay. So B2 is
going to be a pull down. Okay. So we go
horizontal pull. We go over to a
vertical pull on the secondary exercise.
And then the third exercise of the day
is a lowcost feelood joint health
exercise which I've chosen a rope face
pull to the top of the head. I'm only
going to go day three now cuz I'm going
to go avoid day four because it's very
much the same as day two. Let's go to
day three. Deadlift. Snatch, grip,
deadlift from a deficit. Great exercise.
What have we neglected? What's a
secondary exercise? Hip thrust. How is
that an exercise that hits those muscles
on a different joint angle or muscle
length? Hin deadlifts. All patterns of a
deadlift. Romanian deadlift.
Conventional deadlift. Snatch grip
deadlift targets the glutes in the fully
lengthened position. Okay. So, the
profile, the loading profile of that is
max load placed on the glutes when we
are at the bottom, which is where the
glute is at its fully stretched
position. A hip thrust targets the
glutes in the fully shortened position.
Okay, so a lot of the times people argue
which one's better or worse, you know,
lengthen or shorten. Well, why not both?
Okay, and quite common whenever we see
people debating over which one's better.
We don't get to only choose one. So,
it's not one or the other. It is one and
the other. And then, is there any
muscles of the posterior chain that
we've neglected? Yes, there is.
Hamstring curls will fix that. What is
the muscle that we've neglected? We've
neglected the short head of the biceps
forous. Okay. So that's four heads of
the hamstrings. People say three
muscles. Yes. One of the muscles is
called a bicep which has two heads. One
is a long head and one is a short head.
The short head doesn't cross the hip
joint. And therefore its only action is
knee joint flexion. So when you do your
amazing deadlifts, good mornings back
extensions, you're not touching short
head of biceps for morris. How do we
target it? By flexing the knee.
Hamstring curl. Great example. Nordic
drops. Great. So that's an example of a
typical layout where we are avoiding
exercise redundancy. Now, so get that
program, sell it for as much money as
you like. Now, this is a program
demonstrating an exception to the rule.
This is where I'm intentionally using
exercises that are seemingly redundant.
A high absolute strength athlete peing
for competition such as a powerlifting
competition. Let's have a look. I've
only done three days. You can do a
fourth day and follow the same
principles. Day one, of course, we're
starting with squat. What's the first
exercise of the day? When we're peeking
for a comp, we want max specificity.
It's going to be comp squat or typically
it's a low bar squat. Now, in this
example, we're doing one set of one.
Okay? Doing enough volume of heavy
singles to accumulate the amount of
volume necessary to build muscle or even
maintain muscle is going to be way too
fatiguing to do tons and tons of sets of
one. And a lot of people ask that, why
don't I just do 10 sets of one? You
know, that's going to be hugely
stimulating. Yeah, it's also going to be
hugely fatiguing. And I'm not going to
lie, some people it's a great program.
I've done programs similar to that. But
in most instances, high level lifters,
that's too fatiguing to do in a single
day. So, one set of one. Now, I want to
continue adding more volume on that
movement pattern because I'm not done
yet. one set of one. It's exactly what I
need to get good at singles, but it's so
damn heavy that if I do more sets of
that, I'm it's going to contribute to
further fatigue. How far out from
competition does someone start this? I
typically say my peak phases will last
for 4 weeks. Blanket statement. There's
exceptions to every rule. Okay, so you
could say 4 weeks. And why four weeks?
Because it is a significant reduction in
volume. And if you reduce volume
significantly for more than four weeks,
you're most likely going to start seeing
a d-training effect. So therefore, keep
it short. Keep the reduction in volume
phases short. Okay? So four weeks is
what I say is is fair for a peaking
phase. Look at the secondary exercise.
It's more low bar squats, but I'm giving
you so just to keep it simple.
Everything is the secondary work is 2x4
paused of the same movement. Low bar
squat with a pause 2x4. So what does the
pause do? It forces us to spend more
time in the bottom position, which is
the hardest position of the squat, that
makes us have to reduce the loads that
we're lifting. It makes it hard to do
those sets, but because the load is
lower, it's not as fatiguing. So
therefore, we can accumulate significant
enough volume to maintain or even
improve. Okay. Now, I've chosen a leg
curl. So, this is a little bit
strategic. So, this allows me to perform
quadriceps with hamstrings on the same
day. And have a look. Let's just skip to
day three. Deadlifts. The same
principle. I do my main deadlifts. And
look at the third exercise, leg
extension. So this allows me to include
some additional volume on quadriceps on
my posterior chain day. This is for a
strength athlete like a powerlifter.
Starting with a big heavy conventional
deadlift and then the secondary
exercise, 2x4 pause deficit deadlift.
Same joint angles, similar range of
motion, a little bit longer, but it's
fine. It's seemingly a redundant
exercise. However, it's allowing us to
accumulate more volume on a less
loadable movement. Highly stimulating,
not as fatiguing. And now let's go to
the bench press day. First exercise of
the day. Comp bench one by one. Very
fatiguing. You know one by one is not
just fatiguing especially for bench
press. It's a high risk of injury. Bench
press heavy singles high risk of injury.
Most exercises heavy singles as that's
the highest risk of injury of all of our
exercise and rep range selections. One
by one. Highest risk of injury. Pause
spotto bench press. It's a great
variation but not as loadable. very hard
to do heavy lifts, heavy exercises here,
but it's a great way to apply a high
effort without applying a high amount of
fatigue because it's not as loadable.
Hope this makes sense. Okay. And then,
you know, the third exercise of the day,
we've added in the low cost feelood
exercise even for a peak. Leg curl, slap
them in for your comfase. Leg extension,
slap them in for your com phase. Tricep
extension. Guns get the huns. Tries get
the guys. Buyers get the guys. I don't
know. Who do you need? Who do you need?
Anyway, I hope this all makes sense, my
lovely team. Um, there's two free
programs for you. Girls get the girls.
What do we need? What do we need, Jazz?
You know, this is a beautiful peaking
day. This is a beautiful hypertrophy
phase. Follow it. All right, my team.
Love you all. Thank you. Appreciate you
also. Thank you. Thank you. I hope this
was some value and uh have an amazing
day. So, today is Wednesday. I always
lose track of the days. These sessions
are the ones that remind me of what day
it is. I'm sure I'll speak to most of
you tomorrow. Have an amazing week,
everybody. Hope you all had happy
Valentine's Day. We just had that last
week, didn't we? Happy Valentine's
lovers. And I'll see you guys tomorrow.
Thank you. I don't know where the hang
button is yet. Thanks, guys. I'm trying
to find the hang up button. See you
guys. I'll keep talking until I find it.
There it is. No, that wasn't it. That
wasn't it. Here it is.
>> I'm not very clever. Okay. Where were
you when I needed you? That's why I
missed it. It's your fault.
>> purposely stayed silent so I could wait
for it.
>> This is You setting me up. You
You knew I was going to do this
>> always.
>> You'd think I'd learn from the first
time.
>> I still can't find it anyway.
>> I found it.
>> You got it.
>> Love you.
>> Bye. Bye. Five.